# Lesson 2 - Configuring Protractor

Protractor uses a `.js` file for its configuration.

The default expected config file name is `protractor.conf.js`, and it exports a `config` object as a module. Take a look at a basic example below.

```js
// protractor.conf.js

module.exports.config = {
  seleniumAddress: 'http://localhost:4444/wd/hub',
  specs: ['todo-spec.js']
};
```

With the above config, if you would run `npx protractor` in the same directory of `protractor.conf.js`, it would try to run the `todo-spec.js` test using a selenium server running at the following address `http://localhost:4444/wd/hub`.

## Configuring Protractor to test non-angular applications

With a slight change in the configuration, it's possible to allow Protractor for running tests of non-angular applications (see below.)

```js
// protractor.conf.js

module.exports.config = {
  seleniumAddress: 'http://localhost:4444/wd/hub',
  specs: ['todo-spec.js'],
  onPrepare: () => {
    // This line tells Protractor that it can test non-angular apps
    // and runs during its preparation.  😉
    browser.waitForAngularEnabled(false)
  }
}
```

## Exercise

Create a `conf.js` file, and configure Protractor to run tests for any kind of web application (independent if it's Angular or not).

Also, configure it to run any test with the `.spec.js` extension inside of the `specs/` directory.

## Extra credit 1

When the `seleniumAddress` property is not passed as a config, Protractor will start a Selenium standalone server on a random port, it will run the tests against it, and it will shut it down after the tests are run.

It's your turn! Let's make this change.

## Extra credit 2

End-to-end tests of web applications usually start by navigating to a web page through its URL.

Protractor allows us to define a `baseUrl` property in the configuration file so that we don't need to type it everywhere where you need such URL. By using this approach, navigation can happen through relative URLs, which makes the code cleaner. 🧹

The URL of the application that we'll be testing is the following `https://notes-serverless-app.com`.

**IMPORTANT: Do not run any performance testing against this application, and only use it to go through the Testing Automation with Protractor course by the Talking About Testing school.**

It's your turn again. Configure Protractor with the correct value for the `baseUrl` property.

Easy again, ha?

## Extra credit 3

What if we wanted to tell Protractor to maximize the browser during its preparation?

Where would you put this snippet of code?

`browser.driver.manage().window().maximize()`

🕵🏻‍♀️ What about inside of the `onPrepare` function?

Yup! There we go!

___

Shall we move to [lesson 3](./3.md) to prepare for writing our first test?
