# Lesson 4 - Writing your first test

Have your heard of [Jasmine](http://jasmine.github.io), the unit testing library?

So, Protractor uses Jasmine as its default testing library, which means that the structure and syntax are basically the same.

First, you start a test suite, which uses the `describe()` function.

The `describe()` function receives a string as its first argument (e.g., `'my app'`) and a callback function as its second argument.

Inside of the `describe`'s callback function, tests are written in `it()` functions.

Similar to the `describe()` function, `it()` functions also receive a string as its first argument (e.g., `'test login with success'`) and a callback function as its second argument.

Then, the test logic is written inside of it's callback function.

## Exersice

Inside of the `specs/login.spec.js` file, create the basic structure to test the successful login scenario.

🕵🏻‍♀️ Here's a hint.

```js
// specs/login.spec.js

describe('Login', function() {
  it('logs in successfully', function() {

  })
})
```

## Extra credit 1

Go to the terminal on this project's root directory and run `npx webdriver-manager update && npx protractor conf.js`.

```sh
Started
.


1 spec, 0 failures
Finished in 0.165 seconds

[01:25:57] I/local - Shutting down selenium standalone server.
[01:25:57] I/launcher - 0 instance(s) of WebDriver still running
[01:25:57] I/launcher - chrome #01 passed
```

Tada! 🎉 You have your first passing test!

Yeah, I know there's no test implemented yet, but it feels good to see it pass. Don't you feel that?

## Extra credit 2

Alright, now you need to learn a few of the Protractor functionalities.

First, to visit a web page by its relative URL (since we already have the `baseUrl` defined in the config file), Protractor uses `browser.get('/some-relative-url')`.

Secondly, to locate HTML elements, Protractor can use a few strategies. Let's learn some of them.

```js
const iAmATextInputWithAnId = element(by.id('my-id'))
const iAmAnElementWithAClass = element(by.className('some-class'))
const iAmASubmitButton = element(by.css('button[type="submit"]'))
const iAmAHeadingWithASpecificText = element(by.cssContainingText('h1', 'I am a heading, yay!'))
```

Thirdly, to interact with the located elements, Protractor has many different methods. Let's explore a couple of them.

```js
// This is how Protractor simulates a user typing in a text input field (or a text area)
iAmATextInputWiId.sendKeys('Hi!')

// And this is how Protractor clicks on elements such as buttons, links, etc.
iAmASubmitButton.click()
```

It's your turn.

Go to `https://notes-serverless-app.com/signup` and manually create an account to use the created user for the `logs in successfully` test.

Then, implement the test's logic so that it will visit the `/login` relative URL, it will locate the right elements, and it will fill the form and submit.

Finally, run the test (`npx protractor conf.js`).

## Extra credit 3

A test is a not a test if it's making no assertion.

After logging in, we need to assert (somehow) that the user is logged in.

Time to learn how to run a simple assertion with Protractor.

```js
const iAmAHeading = element(by.css('h1'))

expect(iAmAHeading.getText()).toContain('Some text that should be there')
```

Time out. It's you again!

Let's test that after logging in, a heading with the `Your Notes` text is displayed.

Hrm, it didn't work?

This is the error that showed up to me after running the test.

```sh
Started
F

Failures:
1) Login logs in successfully
  Message:
    Failed: No element found using locator: by.cssContainingText("h1", "Your Notes")
  Stack:
    NoSuchElementError: No element found using locator: by.cssContainingText("h1", "Your Notes")
```

Well, we made some progress, but there's one last thing to learn on this lesson.

## Extra credit 4

When testing web applications with Protractor, sometimes you'll need to tell it to wait for certain conditon to happen before moving on.

Meet [`protractor.ExpectedConditions`](http://www.protractortest.org/#/api?view=ProtractorExpectedConditions).

> `protractor.ExpectedConditions` represents a library of canned expected conditions that are useful for Protractor, **especially when dealing with non-angular apps**.

> Each condition returns a function that evaluates to a promise. You may mix multiple conditions using `and`, `or`, and/or `not`. You may also mix these conditions with any other conditions that you write.

**Source:** http://www.protractortest.org/#/api?view=ProtractorExpectedConditions.

Let me try to make it easier to understand it.

Right after filling the form and submitting it, the application makes a request. If it succeeds, it redirects the user to a logged in page, with a 'Your Notes' heading.

The problem is that we're trying to run an assertion (`expect(yourNotesHeading.isDisplayed()).toBe(true)`) before the request is finished and the redirect happens.

That's when `protractor.ExpectedConditions` comes for our rescue! 🦸🏿‍♂️

This is an example of how to use it.

```js
const EC = protractor.ExpectedConditions

describe('Login', function() {
  it('logs in successfully', function() {
    // ... all previous logic is here

    const yourNotesHeading = element(by.cssContainingText('h1', 'Your Notes'))

    browser.wait(EC.visibilityOf(yourNotesHeading), 5000)

    expect(yourNotesHeading.isDisplayed()).toBe(true)
  })
})
```

There we go.

We're defining the heading element.

Then, we're telling the `browser` to `.wait` for a maximum of `5000` milliseconds (5 seconds) on an expected condition to evaluate to `true` (`EC.visibilityOf(yourNotesHeading)`.)

Finally, we're running the assertion that the heading is displayed.

Try to use the above example and run the test (`npx protractor conf.js`)

```sh
Started
.


1 spec, 0 failures
Finished in 3.401 seconds

[00:01:30] I/local - Shutting down selenium standalone server.
[00:01:30] I/launcher - 0 instance(s) of WebDriver still running
[00:01:30] I/launcher - chrome #01 passed
```

Yay! The test is passing again (and now it's for real.)

✨ Contratulations! ✨

___

Move on to [lesson 5](./5.md) and I'll show you an alternative to `protractor.ExpectedConditions`.
